Essence of Linear Algebra: Publish Eigenvalues (#415)
3b1b/3Blue1Brown.com: public/content/lessons/2016/eigenvalues/index.mdx

source: _2016/eola/chapter10.py
credits:
- Lesson by Grant Sanderson
- Text adaptation by Kurt Bruns
- Text adaptation by James Schloss
---

> "Last time, I asked: 'What does mathematics mean to you?', and some people answered: 'The manipulation of numbers, the manipulation of structures.' And if I had asked what music means to you, would you have answered: 'The manipulation of notes?'"
>
> \- Serge Lang

Eigenvectors and eigenvalues are some of those topics that a lot of students find particularly unintuitive. Questions like “why are we doing this?” and “what does this actually mean?” are too often left floating away unanswered in a sea of computations. And as I've put out chapters in this series, many of you have commented about looking forward to visualizing this topic in particular.

> I suspect that the reason for this is not so much that eigen-things are particularly complicated or poorly explained. In fact, it's comparatively straightforward, and I think most books do a fine job explaining it. The issue is that it only really makes sense if you have a solid visual understanding of many of the topics that precede it. Most important here is that you know how to think about matrices as linear transformations. But you also need to be comfortable with determinants, linear systems of equations, and change of basis. Confusion about eigen-stuffs usually has more to do with a shaky foundation in one of these topics than it does with the eigenvectors and eigenvalues themselves.

Reviewer: We could add some lesson links here

## An example

To start, consider some linear transformation in two dimensions, like the one shown here. 

<Figure
    video="./figures/an-example/LinearTransformation.light.mp4" 
    image="./figures/an-example/LinearTransformation.light.svg"
    width="512px"
    show="image"
/>

> It moves the basis vector $\hat{\imath}$ to the coordinates $\left[\begin{array}{c}3 \\ 0\end{array}\right]$, and $\hat{\jmath}$ to $\left[\begin{array}{c}1 \\ 2\end{array}\right]$, so it's represented with a matrix whose columns are $\left[\begin{array}{c}3 \\ 0\end{array}\right]$ and $\left[\begin{array}{c}1 \\ 2\end{array}\right]$. Now, focus on what it does to any individual vector, and think about the span of that vector, the line passing through the origin and its tip.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It moves the basis vector $\hat{\imath}$ to the coordinates $\left[\begin{array}{c}3 \\ 0\end{array}\right]$, and $\hat{\jmath}$ to $\left[\begin{array}{c}1 \\ 2\end{array}\right]$, so it's represented with a the matrix $\left[\begin{array}{c}3 & 1 \\ 0 & 2\end{array}\right]$. Now, focus on what it does to any individual vector, and think about the span of that vector, which is the line passing through the origin and its tip.
```

    width="480px"
/>

With both sides looking like matrix-vector multiplication, we can subtract off the right-hand side and factor out the $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$. So we have a new matrix, $\left(A - \lambda I\right)$, and we're looking for a vector $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ such that this new matrix times $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ gives the zero vector.

<Figure
    image="./figures/notes-on-computation/SymbolicSetEqualToZero.light.svg" 
    width="480px"
/>

Now, this will always be true when $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ is the zero vector, but that's boring, we want a non-zero eigenvector.

### Zero Determinant

As viewers of <LessonLink id="3d-transformations">chapter 5</LessonLink> and <LessonLink id="determinant">chapter 6</LessonLink> will know, the only way it's possible for the product of a matrix with a nonzero vector to become zero is if the transformation associated with that matrix squishes space into a lower dimension. And that squishification corresponds to a zero determinant of the matrix.

<Figure
    image="./figures/notes-on-computation/ZeroDeterminantTransformation.light.svg"
    video="./figures/notes-on-computation/ZeroDeterminantTransformation.light.mp4"
    width="512px"
/>

> To be concrete, let's say your matrix has columns $\left[\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 1 \end{array}\right]$, $\left[\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3 \end{array}\right]$, and imagine subtracting off the variable amount lambda from each diagonal entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be concrete, let's say your matrix is $\left[\begin{array}{c} 2 & 2 \\ 1 & 3 \end{array}\right]$, and imagine subtracting off the variable amount lambda from each diagonal entry.
```

The reason we care about that is because it means $A \cdot \mathbf{v} = \lambda \cdot \mathbf{v}$, which you can read as saying the vector $\mathbf{v}$ is an eigenvector of $A$, staying on its own span during the transformation $A$. In this example, the corresponding eigenvalue is $1$, so it actually just stays fixed in place.

$$
\begin{aligned}
A \vec{\mathbf{v}} & =\lambda \vec{\mathbf{v}} \\ \rule{0pt}{2em}
A \vec{\mathbf{v}}-\lambda I \vec{\mathbf{v}} & =0 \\ \rule{0pt}{2em}
(A-\lambda I) \vec{\mathbf{v}} & =0 \\ \rule{0pt}{2em}
\operatorname{det}(A-\lambda I) & =0 
\end{aligned}
$$

Pause and ponder to make sure that line of reasoning feels good.

### Characteristic polynomial

This expression, where we take a given matrix minus lambda times the identity and set its determinant equal to zero, thinking of lambda as a variable, is fundamental to eigenvalues. This is the kind of thing we mentioned in the introduction. If you didn't have a solid grasp of the determinant, and why it relates to linear systems having non-zero solutions, an expression like this would feel completely out of the blue.

> Let's revisit the example from the start, with the matrix whose columns are $\left[\begin{array}{c} 3 \\ 0 \end{array}\right]$ and $\left[\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 2 \end{array}\right]$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's revisit the example from the start, with the matrix $\left[\begin{array}{c} 3 & 1\\ 0 & 2 \end{array}\right]$.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/notes-on-computation/CharacteristicPolynomialExample.light.svg" 
    video="./figures/notes-on-computation/CharacteristicPolynomialExample.light.mp4" 
    width="512px"
/>

To find if a value $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue, subtract it from the diagonals of this matrix, and compute the determinant.

$$
\operatorname{det}\left(\left[\begin{array}{cc}3-\lambda & \mathbb{1} \\ 0 & 2-\lambda\end{array}\right]\right)
$$

Doing this, we get a certain quadratic polynomial in terms of lambda.

$$
\operatorname{det}\left(\left[\begin{array}{cc}3-\lambda & \mathbb{1} \\ 0 & 2-\lambda\end{array}\right]\right) = (3 - \lambda)(2- \lambda)
$$

Since lambda can only be an eigenvalue if this determinant is zero, you can conclude that the only eigenvalues are $\lambda = 2$ and $\lambda = 3$. To see what eigenvectors have one of these eigenvalues, say $\lambda=2$, plug in that value of lambda to the matrix, and solve for which vectors this diagonally-altered matrix sends to zero.

$$
\left[\begin{array}{cc}
3-2 & 1 \\
0 & 2-2
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{l}
x \\
y
\end{array}\right]=\left[\begin{array}{l}
0 \\
0
\end{array}\right]
$$

> If you computed this, you'd see that the solutions are all of the vectors on the diagonal line spanned by $\left[\begin{array}{c} -1 \\ 1 \end{array}\right]$. This corresponds to the fact that the unaltered matrix $\left[\begin{array}{c} 3 \\ 0 \end{array}\right]$, $\left[\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 2 \end{array}\right]$ stretches all those vectors by a factor of $2$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you computed this, you'd see that the solutions are all of the vectors on the diagonal line spanned by $\left[\begin{array}{c} -1 \\ 1 \end{array}\right]$. This corresponds to the fact that the unaltered matrix $\left[\begin{array}{c} 3 & 1 \\ 0 & 2 \end{array}\right]$ stretches all those vectors by a factor of $2$.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/notes-on-computation/CharacteristicPolynomialEigenvalues.light.svg" 
    video="./figures/notes-on-computation/CharacteristicPolynomialEigenvalues.light.mp4" 
    width="512px"
/>

### Rotation

Now, a 2d transformation doesn't have to have eigenvectors. For example, consider a rotation by $90$ degrees. This doesn't have any eigenvectors, since each vector is rotated off of its own span.

<Figure
    image="./figures/notes-on-computation/RotationTransformation.light.svg" 
    video="./figures/notes-on-computation/RotationTransformation.light.mp4" 
    width="512px"
/>

> If you actually try computing the eigenvalues for a $90$ degree rotation, notice what happens. Its matrix has columns $\left[\begin{array}{c} 0 \\ 1 \end{array}\right]$, $\left[\begin{array}{c} -1 \\ 0 \end{array}\right]$. Subtract $\lambda$ from the diagonal elements, and look for when the determinant is $0$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you actually try computing the eigenvalues for a $90$ degree rotation, notice what happens. Its matrix is $\left[\begin{array}{c} 0 & -1 \\ 1 & 0 \end{array}\right]$. Subtract $\lambda$ from the diagonal elements, and look for when the determinant is $0$.
```

$$
\begin{aligned}
\operatorname{det}\left(\left[\begin{array}{cc}-\lambda & -1 \\ 1 & -\lambda\end{array}\right]\right) & =(-\lambda)(-\lambda)-(-1)(1) \\ \rule{0pt}{2em}
& =\lambda^2+1=0
\end{aligned}
$$

In this case, you get the polynomial $\lambda^2 + 1$. The only roots of this polynomial are the imaginary numbers $i$ and $-i$. The fact that there are no real number solutions indicates that there are no eigenvectors.

### Shear

> Another interesting example is a shear. This fixes $\hat{\imath}$ in place, and moves $\hat{\jmath}$ one over, so its matrix has columns $\left[\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 0 \end{array}\right]$ and $\left[\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 1 \end{array}\right]$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another interesting example is a shear. This fixes $\hat{\imath}$ in place, and moves $\hat{\jmath}$ one over, so its matrix is $\left[\begin{array}{c} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1\end{array}\right]$.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/notes-on-computation/ScalingTransformation.light.svg" 
    video="./figures/notes-on-computation/ScalingTransformation.light.mp4" 
    width="512px"
    caption="Scale everything by $2$."
/>

Now is another good time to pause and ponder some of this.

### Questions

<Question
  question="What is the eigenvalue(s) of the matrix $\left[\begin{array}{cc}3 & 2 \\ 2 & 3\end{array}\right]$?"
  choice1="$3$"
  choice2="$5$"
  choice3="$5$ and $1$"
  choice4="$2$"
  answer={3}
>

$$
\begin{aligned}
\operatorname{det}\left(\left[\begin{array}{cc}
3-\lambda & 2 \\
2 & 3-\lambda
\end{array}\right]\right) & =0 \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
0 & =(3-\lambda)(3-\lambda)-4 \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
0 & =\lambda^2-6 \lambda+5 \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
0 & =(\lambda-5)(\lambda-1) \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
\lambda & =5 \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
\lambda & =1
\end{aligned}
$$

</Question>

<Question
  question="What is the eigenvalue(s) of the matrix $\left[\begin{array}{cc}2 & 1 \\ -1 & 2\end{array}\right]$?"

>   choice1="There are none."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  choice1="There are real eigenvalues."
```

  choice2="$2$"
  choice3="$3$ and $1$"
  choice4="$1$"
  answer={1}
>

$$
\begin{aligned}
\operatorname{det}\left(\left[\begin{array}{cc}
2-\lambda & 1 \\ 
-1 & 2-\lambda
\end{array}\right]\right) & =0 \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
0 & =(2-\lambda)^2+1 \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
-1 & =(2-\lambda)^2 \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
\sqrt{-1} & =2-\lambda \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
\lambda & =2-\sqrt{-1} \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
\lambda & =2+i \\ \rule{0pt}{1.5em}
\lambda & =2-i
\end{aligned}
$$

The fact that there are no real number solutions indicates that there are no eigenvectors.

</Question>

<Question
  question="What is the eigenvalue(s) of the matrix $\left[\begin{array}{cc}-2 & 1 \\ 0 & -2\end{array}\right]$"
  choice1="There are none."
  choice2="$2$"
  choice3="$3$"
  choice4="$-2$"
  answer={4}
>

$$
\begin{aligned}
\operatorname{det}\left(\left[\begin{array}{cc}

> -2-\lambda & 0 \\
> 1 & -2-\lambda

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-2-\lambda & 1 \\
0 & -2-\lambda
```

x \\
y
\end{array}\right]
& =
\left[\begin{array}{c}
3 x \\
2 y
\end{array}\right] \\ \rule{0pt}{2.5em}

\left[\begin{array}{ll}
3 & 0 \\
0 & 2
\end{array}\right]
\left[\begin{array}{c}
3 x \\
2 y
\end{array}\right]
& =
\left[\begin{array}{c}
3^2 x \\
2^2 y
\end{array}\right] \\ \rule{0pt}{2.5em}

\left[\begin{array}{ll}
3 & 0 \\
0 & 2
\end{array}\right]
\left[\begin{array}{c}
3^2 x \\
2^2 y
\end{array}\right]
& =
\left[\begin{array}{c}
3^3 x \\
2^3 y
\end{array}\right] \\ \rule{0pt}{2.5em}

& \ldots 
\end{aligned}
$$

Since all one of these matrices does is scale each basis vector by some eigenvalue, applying that matrix, say, 100 times will just correspond to scaling each basis vector by the 100th power of the corresponding eigenvalue.

$$

\underbrace{\left[\begin{array}{ll}
3 & 0 \\
0 & 2
\end{array}\right] \cdots \left[\begin{array}{ll}
3 & 0 \\
0 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{ll}
3 & 0 \\
0 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{ll}
3 & 0 \\
0 & 2
\end{array}\right]}_{100 \text { times }}\left[\begin{array}{l}
x \\
y
\end{array}\right]
= 
\left[\begin{array}{cc}
3^{100} & 0 \\
0 & 2^{100}
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{l}
x \\
y
\end{array}\right]

$$

> In contrast, try to compute the 100th power of a non-diagonal matrix would be. Really, think about it for a moment, it'd be a nightmare.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By contrast, consider how hard computing the 100th power of a non-diagonal matrix would be. Really, think about it for a moment, compared to simply exponentiating the entries it's a nightmare!
```

### Change of basis

> Of course, you will rarely be so lucky as to have your basis vectors also be eigenvectors. But if your transformation has lots of eigenvectors, like the one from the start of the video, enough that you can choose a set that spans the full space. Then you can change your coordinate system so that these eigenvectors are your basis vectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, you will rarely be so lucky as to have your basis vectors also be eigenvectors. But if your transformation has lots of eigenvectors, enough that you can choose a set that spans the full space, then you can change your coordinate system so that these eigenvectors are your basis vectors.
```
